# Montecarlo_Simulator
Final Project for DS5100


# Metadata 
    "Created by: Bella Samper
    Project name: Monte Carlo Simulator
    DS5100"


# Synopsis

**Description:** 

The Montecarlo Simulator has three classes that will work in tandem to generate various outcomes. These Classes include: Die class which generates a die that has N sides (faces) and W weights and is rolled to select a face, Game class which rolls one or more dice of the same kind one or more times, and a Analyzer class which computes various descriptive statistical properities about the single game. 

According to a Professor at the University of Virginia named Rafael Alvarado:

"Monte Carlo methods 1 are family of techniques first developed by physicists in the 1940s to predict the outcomes of complex stochastic processes, such as nuclear fission and fusion. The behavior of random variables are modeled by chance mechanisms such as dice and computers, using random number generators. The data generated by these mechanisms through sampling are employed to influence the direction of a process."

### Installing 

To install the package go to the git repo Montecarlo Simulator, clone it, navigate to the folder, and run the following code in your terminal 
```python
pip install Montecarlo_Package
```
### Importing

To import the package you have to use the following code: 

```python
from Montecarlo import *
```
### Die Class 

The `Die class` has a die that has N sides (faces) and W weights and is rolled to select a face. The weights default to 1.0 for each face but can be changed after the object is created. It has one behavior, which is to be rolled one or more times. 

##### The `Init` 

To create a `Die object` input an array of faces as an argument and it will internally initialize the weights to 1.0 for each face. It also saves both faces and weights into a private dataframe that is to be shared by other methods. In this case, we have a die object with an array of (1,2,3,4,5,6). 

```python 
die1 = Die([1,2,3,4,5,6])
```

##### The `change the weight` method 

To change the weight of a specific side, input the face value to be changed and the new weight. The method will check to see if the face passed is valid and if the weight is valid (is it a float and can it be converted to one). In this case, we are changing the weight of the face_value '3' from the weight 1.0 to the weight 5.0 which will be stored in the dataframe. 

```python
die1.change_the_weight(3, 5.0)
```

##### The `Roll` Method 

To roll the Die object a certain amount of times, input a number greater than 1. If you do not input a number it will default to 1. The method will create a random sample from the vecotr of faces according to the weights and will return a list of outcomes in a dataframe. In this case, we are rolling the die object 100 times. 

```python
die1.roll(100)
```

##### The `Show` Method 

To show the die object's current set of faces and weights, call the show method which will return a dataframe created in the initializer with the new weight if it was changed.

```python 
die1.show()
```


### The Game Class

The `Game class` consists of rolling one or more dice of the same kind one or more times. You can initialize with one or more of similary defined die objects which means that each die object has the same number of sides and associated faces. The class will play a game and keep the results of its most recent play 

##### The `Init` 

To create a `Game object` input a list of already instantiated similar Die objects and will return nothing. In this case, we are creating a Game object with 3 of the die objects from above. 

```python 
game1 = Game([die1, die2, die3])
```

##### The `Play` Method 

To roll the `Game object` a certain amount of times, input a number that you want to roll which will save the results of the play into a private dataframe of shape N rolls and M dice. In this case, we are rolling the game object 1000 times. 

```python 
game1.play(1000)
```

##### The `Show` Method 

To get the results of the most recent play, pass the `show()` function with the parameter of True or False. The default is True which will return a wide dataframe. If you input False, it will return a narrow dataframe. The narrow form will have a two-column index with the roll number and the die number and a column of the faces rolled. In this case, the dataframe will be in a wide format. 

```python
game1.show(False)
```

### The `Analyzer class` 

The Analyzer class takes the result of a single game and computes various descriptive statistical properities about it. These properties results are available as attributes of an Analyzer object. 

##### The `init` 

To create an Analyzer object input a game object as the parameter. In this case, the game object is game1. 

```python 
analyzer1 = Analyzer(game1)
```


##### The `jackpot` Method 

To compute how many times a roll results in all faces being the same, pass the jackpot function with your analyzer object. This will return the integer of the number of times a jackpot happened. It also stores the results as a dataframe of jackpot results in a public attribute with roll number as the index. 

```python
analyzer1.jackpot()
```

##### The `combo` Method 

To compute the distinct combinations of faces rolled with their counts, pass the combo method with analyzer object. It will store the combinations sorted and saved as multi-columned index as a dataframe in a public attribute. 

```python 
analyzer1.combo()
```

##### The `face counts per roll` Method 

To compute how many times a given face is rolled in each event, pass the combo function with your analyzer object. This will sotre the results as a dataframe in a public attribute with index of the roll number and face values as columns. 

```python
analyzer1.face_counts_per_roll()
```


# API Description

## `class Die:`

    '''
    PURPOSE: Takes a die object that has N sides (faces) and W weights and rolls the object
    
    FUNCTIONS: 
    change_the_weight() 
       Checks to see if the face and weight passed is valid and allows you change the weight of a specific face of the die object 
    
    roll() function 
        Does a random sample from the vector of faces accoring to the weights
    
    show() function 
        Returns the current set of faces and weights in a dataframe
   
    '''
    
### `def __init__(self, faces):`

         '''
        PURPOSE: Constructs all the necessary attributes for the Die class

        INPUTS
        faces   str or int an array of faces
        '''
### `def change_the_weight(self, face_value, new_weight):`

        '''
        PURPOSE: Checks to see if the face passed is valid and checks to see if the weight is valid, then changes the weight of a specifice face 

        INPUTS
        face_value   int 
        new_weight   int
        '''
        
### `def roll(self, num_rolls=1):`
        '''
        PURPOSE: Roll the die one or more times

        INPUTS
        num_rolls   int defaults to 1
        
        OUTPUT
        outcomes    list of the rolls
        '''
        
###  `def show(self):`
        '''
        PURPOSE: Show the user the die's current set of faces and weights
        '''
        
## `class Game():`
    '''
     A game consists of rolling of one or more dice of the same kind one or more times.
     
     FUNCTIONS
     play()
        Rolls the dice a number of times given 
        
     show() 
        shows the user th results of the most recent play
    '''
    
### `def __init__(self, Die_List):`
        '''
        PURPOSE: Constructs all the necessary attributes for the Game class

        INPUTS
        Die_List    list of instantiated similar die objects

        OUTPUT
        None
        '''
        
### `def play(self, times_rolled):`
        '''
        PURPOSE: Rolls the dice the number of times given

        INPUTS
        times_rolled    number
        '''
        
### `def show(self, wide = True):`
        
        '''
        PURPOSE: Shows the user the results of the most recent play in narrow or wide formate

        INPUTS
        Wide      boolean - default is True 

        OUTPUT
        narrow_df       Dataframe in narrow format 
        self._play_df   Dataframe in wide format 
        '''

## `class Analyzer:`
    '''
    Takes the results of a single game and computes various descriptive statistical properites about it
    
    FUNCTIONS 
        jackpot() counts how many times a roll resulted in all faces being the same 
        
        combo() counts how many combination types of faces were rolled and their counts 
        
        face_counts_per_roll() the number of times a given face appeared in each roll
        
    '''
    
### `def __init__(self, game_object):`
        
        '''
        PURPOSE: Constructs all the necessary attributes for the Analyzer class

        INPUTS
        game_object    Dataframe 

        '''
###  `def jackpot(self):`
        
        '''
        PURPOSE: Computes how many times the game resulted in all faces being identical


        OUTPUT
        len(self.booleans[self.booleans == True])     int
        '''
### `def combo(self):`
        
        '''
        PURPOSE: Computes the distinct combinations of faces rolled, along with their counts

        '''
        
###  `def face_counts_per_roll(self):`
        
        '''
        PURPOSE: Computes how many times a given face is rolled in each event

        '''

    "A list of all classes with their public methods and attributes.
    Each item should show their docstrings.
    All paramters (with data types and defaults) should be described.
    All return values should be described.
    Do not describe private methods and attributes.
    "


## Manifest 

   Files in my repo: 
   
   - Montecarlo.py 
   - Montecarlo_Tests.py
   - Montecarlo_demo.ipynb
   - Montecarlo_Tests.txt
   - setup.py 
   - __init__.py 
   - Directory.py 
   - README.md